

HOWTO Template for Big Linuxdoc HOWTOs


Stein Gjoen, sgjoen@nyx.net

v0.09, 20 May 2002
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 This is a fully working template for big HOWTOs. The source contains fully
described slots to make a convenient framework for you to fill in for making
your own HOWTO, suggesting some names, conventions and contents for the
chapters.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1. Introduction

 My comments to the reader is in this style (emphasized). Example lines are in
plain roman style. Note that extra comments and advice is found in comments
within the SGML source.
For various reasons this brand new release is codenamed the release release.
New code names will appear as per industry standard guidelines to emphasize the
state-of-the-art-ness of this document.
This document was written when I read a feedback asking for a template to fill
in to make new HOWTOs. This template is made by extracting the skeletal
structure of the Multi Disk HOWTO which is a rather large HOWTO.
This Template is a suggestion and a starting point, a check list and examples
for authors; it is not a requirement to be followed slavishly. Over time HOWTOs
might also outgrow any template since in the end the goal is to inform readers
efficiently.
Stating the background is a simple way to getting started writing the intro.
First of all we need a bit of legalese. Recent development shows it is quite
important.

1.1 Copyright

Copyright is a source of much and continuous debate on the LDP mailing list.
For more in depth information please consult the Manifesto at the LinuxDoc
site. The purpose of having a license is to allow appropriate distribution. You
can use any license that meets the Manifesto. What follows is a boilerplate
licence.
This document is Copyright 2000 by John Doe (change to your name). Permission
is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under the terms of
the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1 or any later version published
by the Free Software Foundation with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover
Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts. A copy of the license can be found in Appendix
A.
Replace with your name, or supply a new license, when you use this template for
a new HOWTO.

1.2 Disclaimer

Use the information in this document at your own risk. I disavow any potential
liability for the contents of this document. Use of the concepts, examples,
and/or other content of this document is entirely at your own risk.
All copyrights are owned by their owners, unless specifically noted otherwise.
Use of a term in this document should not be regarded as affecting the validity
of any trademark or service mark.
Naming of particular products or brands should not be seen as endorsements.
You are strongly recommended to take a backup of your system before major
installation and backups at regular intervals.

1.3 News

 This is where you make a summary of what is new. When a HOWTO exceeds 20 pages
it takes more than a casual read to find the updates. This is where you help
your readers with that, alerting them to specific and important news.
This is the second release featuring more samples and an improved structure.
Tell people where the document home page is so the very newest release could be
found in case of problems with the main Linux_Documentation_Project homepage.
The latest version number of this document can be gleaned from my plan entry if
you finger my Nyx account.
If you have the capacity it would be nice to make the HOWTO available in a
number of formats.
Also, the latest version of the Template will be available on my web space on
Nyx in a number of formats:

* HTML.
* plain_ASCII_text.
* SGML_source.

Note that paper sizes vary in the world, A4 and US letter differ significantly.

1.4 Credits

It is always nice to acknowledge people who help you with inputs, it is also
regarded by many as important in the Linux world new economy
In this version I have the pleasure of acknowledging


       corff (at) ZEDAT.FU-Berlin.DE
       dwood (at) plugged.net.au
       lcl (at) spiretech.com
       kgh12351 (at) nifty.ne.jp
       dave (at) lafn.org
       name (at) site.org


Scramble the addresses so email harvesters cannot get addresses from your HOWTO
and then spam people. That has happened in the past.

1.5 Translations

Not everyone speaks English, pointers to translations are nice. Also your
translators tend to give very important inputs.

* German_Translation by someone (at) somewhere.de
* Swedish_Translation by someone (at) somewhere.se
* French_Translation by someone (at) somewhere.fr
* Chinese_Translation by someone (at) somewhere.cn
* Italian_Translation by someone (at) somewhere.it

Also Somecompany is acknowledged for sending me documentation on their gizmos
as well as permission to quote from the material. These quotes have been
approved before appearing here and will be clearly labelled.
Any comments or suggestions can be mailed to my mail address on Nyx:
sgjoen@nyx.net.

2. Structure

A quick overview on how all parts fit together in the structure. Here I use an
example from my Multi Disk HOWTO.
As this type of document is supposed to be as much for learning as a technical
reference document I have rearranged the structure to this end. For the
designer of a system it is more useful to have the information presented in
terms of the goals of this exercise than from the point of view of the logical
layer structure of the devices themselves. Nevertheless this document would not
be complete without such a layer structure the computer field is so full of, so
I will include it here as an introduction to how it works.

2.1 Logical structure

 This is based on how each layer access each other, traditionally with the
application on top and the physical layer on the bottom. It is quite useful to
show the interrelationship between each of the layers used in controlling
drives.


               ___________________________________________________________
               |__     File structure          ( /usr /tmp etc)        __|
               |__     File system             (ext2fs, vfat etc)      __|
               |__     Volume management       (AFS)                   __|
               |__     RAID, concatenation     (md)                    __|
               |__     Device driver           (SCSI, IDE etc)         __|
               |__     Controller              (chip, card)            __|
               |__     Connection              (cable, network)        __|
               |__     Drive                   (magnetic, optical etc) __|
               -----------------------------------------------------------


In the above diagram both volume management and RAID and concatenation are
optional layers. The 3 lower layers are in hardware. All parts are discussed at
length later on in this document.

2.2 Document structure

Most users start out with a given set of hardware and some plans on what they
wish to achieve and how big the system should be. This is the point of view I
will adopt in this document in presenting the material, starting out with
hardware, continuing with design constraints before detailing the design
strategy that I have found to work well. I have used this both for my own
personal computer at home, a multi purpose server at work and found it worked
quite well. In addition my Japanese co-worker in this project have applied the
same strategy on a server in an academic setting with similar success.
Finally at the end I have detailed some configuration tables for use in your
own design. If you have any comments regarding this or notes from your own
design work I would like to hear from you so this document can be upgraded.

2.3 Reading plan

As you go beyond 50 pages or so there will be a lot of text that experts and
even the experienced do not need to read. Keeping in mind that we wish to care
for all kinds of people in the Linux world we might have to make a reading
plan. Again example follows from my HOWTO.
Although not the biggest HOWTO it is nevertheless rather big already and I have
been requested to make a reading plan to make it possible to cut down on the
volume


  Expert
      (aka the elite). If you are familiar with Linux as well as disk drive
      technologies you will find most of what you need in the appendices.
      Additionally you are recommended to read the FAQ and the Bits'n'pieces
      chapter.

  Experienced
      (aka Competent). If you are familiar with computers in general you can go
      straight to the chapters on technologies and continue from there on.

  Newbie
      (mostly harmless). You just have to read the whole thing. Sorry. In
      addition you are also recommended to read all the other disk related
      HOWTOs.


 3. Technologies

 Introduction of technology for the newbie with a few references to detailled
works. Remember that not everyone has Internet access so you have to explain in
sufficient details so even the newbie can get by.

4. Implementation

 Now your readers should have a sufficient knowledge of what this is about and
now we come to the hands on of implementing your clever scheme.

5. Maintenance

 Few systems and designs are maintenance free, here you explain how to keep the
system running.

6. Advanced Issues

 You can get most things up and running in a quick and dirty fashion, useful
for testing and getting used to how things work. For more serious use you would
need to be a little more advanced. This is the place to explain it all, if
applicable.

 7. Troubleshooting

 Many problems can be solved by a simple structured approach, analysing the
symptoms, finding the cause and determining the solution. The following is an
excerpts from the Multi Disk HOWTO.

7.1 During Installation


Locating Disks



  Symptoms
      Cannot find disk

  Problem
      How to find what drive letter corresponds to what disk/partition

  Solution
      Remember Linux does not use drive letters but device names. More
      information can be found in section "Drive names".



  Symptoms
      Cannot partition disk

  Problem
      Most likely wrong input to the command line for fdisk or similar tool.

  Solution
      Remember to use /dev/hda rather than just hda. Also do not use numbers
      behind hda, those indicate partitions.


Formatting



  Symptoms
      Cannot format disk.

  Problem
      Strictly speaking you format partitions not disks.

  Solution
      Make sure you add the partition number after the device name of the disk,
      for instance /dev/hda1 to the command line.


8. Further Information

 A HOWTO cannot describe everything, some times the user has to venture out on
the net to get more information or just updates. Here is the place to tell
where and how. Again examples from my HOWTO, replace as needed. There is wealth
of information one should go through when setting up a major system, for
instance for a news or general Internet service provider. The FAQs in the
following groups are useful:

8.1 News groups

 Some of the most interesting news groups are:

* Storage.
* PC_storage.
* AFS.
* SCSI.
* Linux_setup.

Most newsgroups have their own FAQ that are designed to answer most of your
questions, as the name Frequently Asked Questions indicate. Fresh versions
should be posted regularly to the relevant newsgroups. If you cannot find it in
your news spool you could go directly to the FAQ_main_archive_FTP_site. The WWW
versions can be browsed at FAQ_main_archive_WWW_site.
Some FAQs have their own home site, of particular interest here are

* SCSI_FAQ and
* comp.arch.storage_FAQ.


8.2 Mailing Lists

 These are low noise channels mainly for developers. Think twice before asking
questions there as noise delays the development. Some relevant lists are linux-
raid, linux-scsi and linux-ext2fs. Many of the most useful mailing lists run on
the vger.rutgers.edu server but this is notoriously overloaded, so try to find
a mirror. There are some lists mirrored at The_Redhat_Home_Page. Many lists are
also accessible at linuxhq, and the rest of the web site is a gold mine of
useful information.
If you want to find out more about the lists available you can send a message
with the line lists to the list server at vger.rutgers.edu
( majordomo@vger.rutgers.edu). If you need help on how to use the mail server
just send the line help to the same address. Due to the popularity of this
server it is likely it takes a bit to time before you get a reply or even get
messages after you send a subscribe command.
There is also a number of other majordomo list servers that can be of interest
such as the EATA driver list ( linux-eata@mail.uni-mainz.de) and the
Intelligent IO list linux-i2o@dpt.com.
Mailing lists are in a state of flux but you can find links to a number of
interesting lists from the Linux_Documentation_Homepage.

8.3 HOWTO

 These are intended as the primary starting points to get the background
information as well as show you how to solve a specific problem. Some relevant
HOWTOs are Bootdisk, Installation, SCSI and UMSDOS. The main site for these is
the LDP_archive at Metalab (formerly known as Sunsite).
There is a new HOWTO out that deals with setting up a DPT RAID system, check
out the DPT_RAID_HOWTO_homepage.

8.4 Mini-HOWTO

 These are the smaller free text relatives to the HOWTOs. Some relevant mini-
HOWTOs are Backup-With-MSDOS, Diskless, LILO, Large Disk, Linux+DOS+Win95+OS2,
Linux+OS2+DOS, Linux+Win95, NFS-Root, Win95+Win+Linux, ZIP Drive . You can find
these at the same place as the HOWTOs, usually in a sub directory called mini.
Note that these are scheduled to be converted into SGML and become proper
HOWTOs in the near future.
The old Linux Large IDE mini-HOWTO is no longer valid, instead read /usr/src/
linux/drivers/block/README.ide or /usr/src/linux/Documentation/ide.txt.

8.5 Local Resources

 In most distributions of Linux there is a document directory installed, have a
look in the /usr/doc directory. where most packages store their main
documentation and README files etc. Also you will here find the HOWTO archive
( /usr/doc/HOWTO) of ready formatted HOWTOs and also the mini-HOWTO archive ( /
usr/doc/HOWTO/mini) of plain text documents.
Many of the configuration files mentioned earlier can be found in the /etc
directory. In particular you will want to work with the /etc/fstab file that
sets up the mounting of partitions and possibly also /etc/mdtab file that is
used for the md system to set up RAID.
The kernel source in /usr/src/linux is, of course, the ultimate documentation.
In other words, use the source, Luke. It should also be pointed out that the
kernel comes not only with source code which is even commented (well, partially
at least) but also an informative documentation_directory. If you are about to
ask any questions about the kernel you should read this first, it will save you
and many others a lot of time and possibly embarrassment.
Also have a look in your system log file ( /var/log/messages) to see what is
going on and in particular how the booting went if too much scrolled off your
screen. Using tail -f /var/log/messages in a separate window or screen will
give you a continuous update of what is going on in your system.
You can also take advantage of the /proc file system that is a window into the
inner workings of your system. Use cat rather than more to view the files as
they are reported as being zero length. Reports are that less works well here.

8.6 Web Pages

  There is a huge number of informative web pages out there and by their very
nature they change quickly so don't be too surprised if these links become
quickly outdated.
A good starting point is of course the Linux_Documentation_Project home page,
an information central for documentation, project pages and much, much more.
Please let me know if you have any other leads that can be of interest.

9. Getting Help

 Your reader might still end up in a situation where extra help is needed from
someone else, perhaps on the net. In order to get fast and efficient help it is
best first to get some details on your system. What details matter depends on
type of problem. For disk problems you need to know the disk controllers etc,
for networking problems you have to know what ethernet card is used and version
of drivers etc. Here is the place to suggest what details to have ready when
asking for help.
In the end you might find yourself unable to solve your problems and need help
from someone else. The most efficient way is either to ask someone local or in
your nearest Linux user group, search the web for the nearest one.
Another possibility is to ask on Usenet News in one of the many, many
newsgroups available. The problem is that these have such a high volume and
noise (called low signal-to-noise ratio) that your question can easily fall
through unanswered.
No matter where you ask it is important to ask well or you will not be taken
seriously. Saying just my disk does not work is not going to help you and
instead the noise level is increased even further and if you are lucky someone
will ask you to clarify.
Instead describe your problems in some detail that will enable people to help
you. The problem could lie somewhere you did not expect. Therefore you are
advised to list up the following information on your system:


  Hardware

      * Processor
      * DMA
      * IRQ
      * Chip set (LX, BX etc)
      * Bus (ISA, VESA, PCI etc)
      * Expansion cards used (Disk controllers, video, IO etc)


  Software

      * BIOS (On motherboard and possibly SCSI host adapters)
      * LILO, if used
      * Linux kernel version as well as possible modifications and patches
      * Kernel parameters, if any
      * Software that shows the error (with version number or date)


  Peripherals

      * Type of disk drives with manufacturer name, version and type
      * Other relevant peripherals connected to the same busses


Remember that booting text is logged to /var/log/messages which can answer most
of the questions above. Obviously if the drives fail you might not be able to
get the log saved to disk but you can at least scroll back up the screen using
the SHIFT and PAGE UP keys. It may also be useful to include part of this in
your request for help but do not go overboard, keep it brief as a complete log
file dumped to Usenet News is more than a little annoying.

10. Concluding Remarks

 Just summing up... Also a place for general recommendations.

11. Questions and Answers

  Check the newsgroups and try to determine some frequent problems and cover
them here. Again an example from my HOWTO.
This is just a collection of what I believe are the most common questions
people might have. Give me more feedback and I will turn this section into a
proper FAQ.

* Q:How many physical disk drives (spindles) does a Linux system need?
  A: Linux can run just fine on one drive (spindle). Having enough RAM (around
  32 MB, and up to 64 MB) to support swapping is a better price/performance
  choice than getting a second disk. (E)IDE disk is usually cheaper (but a
  little slower) than SCSI.
* Q: Are there any disadvantages in this scheme?
  A: There is only a minor snag: if even a single partition overflows the
  system might stop working properly. The severity depends of course on what
  partition is affected. Still this is not hard to monitor, the command df
  gives you a good overview of the situation. Also check the swap partition(s)
  using free to make sure you are not about to run out of virtual memory.
* Q: OK, so should I split the system into as many partitions as possible for a
  single drive?
  A: No, there are several disadvantages to that. First of all maintenance
  becomes needlessly complex and you gain very little in this. In fact if your
  partitions are too big you will seek across larger areas than needed. This is
  a balance and dependent on the number of physical drives you have.

(rest deleted.)

 12. Bits and Pieces

 This is basically a section where I stuff all the bits I have not yet decided
where should go, yet that I feel is worth knowing about. It is a kind of
transient area.

13. Examples

 Example designs and sample configuration files and other relevant details is
always handy. Keep large samples at the end to avoid breaking the flow of the
HOWTO reading. Small samples are useful within the main body of the HOWTO.

 14. Samples

This section gives some simple SGML examples you could copy. Read the source to
see how it was done.

14.1 Lists

Lists appears many times, in a number of formats:
Unlisted bullets:

* Apples
* Oranges
* Bananas

Tagged lists


  Fruits
      such as apples, oranges, and more.

  Nuts
      Don't eat too many; you are what you eat.

  Vegetables
      Potatos are spelled with care.


14.2 Links

Links can be used within your documents to refer to different sections and
chapters or to refer to documents external to yours.
Internal links
Click on this link to jump to the top of this chapter. Note the anchor at the
section tag.
External links
Click on this link to jump to the LDP site. Note you can use http, ftp, news
and other protocols in the locator if required. Note that the character ~ has
to be escaped, see the source for details.

14.3 Images

Avoid diagrams if possible as this cannot be rendered in the ascii outputs
which are still needed by many around the world.
  Graphics Test Image

 15. Table Samples

This section gives an example of writing a table.

                           _________________________
                          |Line_No.|Country|Capital_|
                          |1_______|Norway_|Oslo____|
                          |2_______|Japan__|Tokyo___|
                          |3_______|Finland|Helsinki|

                                 Some capitals


 16. Notes on Style

Not much here yet but I would like to suggest a few points.


  Tags
      Try to use tags extensively

  Types
      Try using functional tags such as em rather than it.

  Files
      Try using functional links to files such as /usr/doc rather than just /
      usr/doc.

  Commands
      Try to refer to man pages including section number df (1) rather than
      just df.


17. Converting the SGML File

Having made the SGML file we are now ready to convert it to the various output
formats we need. The following is my script to process my Multi Disk HOWTO:
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  sgml2txt -f disk.sgml
  sgml2html disk.sgml

  sgml2latex --papersize=a4 --language=english  --output=ps ~stein/doc/
  disk.sgml
  mv disk.ps disk-A4.ps
  gzip -9 disk-A4.ps

  sgml2latex --papersize=letter --language=english  --output=ps ~stein/doc/
  disk.sgml
  mv disk.ps disk-US.ps
  gzip -9 disk-US.ps

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The template can be converted as is, substitute "disk.sgml" with the filename
of this template to see what it looks like.
If your document is small (such as this template) you might find it more
convenient to keep formatted versions in one single file rather than splitting
it for every chapter:
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  sgml2html --split=0 template.sgml

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

18. Appendix A: Copyright



                       GNU Free Documentation License
                          Version 1.1, March 2000

        Copyright (C) 2000  Free Software Foundation, Inc.
            59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA  02111-1307  USA
        Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies
        of this license document, but changing it is not allowed.


       0. PREAMBLE

       The purpose of this License is to make a manual, textbook, or other
       written document "free" in the sense of freedom: to assure everyone
       the effective freedom to copy and redistribute it, with or without
       modifying it, either commercially or noncommercially.  Secondarily,
       this License preserves for the author and publisher a way to get
       credit for their work, while not being considered responsible for
       modifications made by others.

       This License is a kind of "copyleft", which means that derivative
       works of the document must themselves be free in the same sense.
       It
       complements the GNU General Public License, which is a copyleft
       license designed for free software.

       We have designed this License in order to use it for manuals for
       free
       software, because free software needs free documentation: a free
       program should come with manuals providing the same freedoms that
       the
       software does.  But this License is not limited to software
       manuals;
       it can be used for any textual work, regardless of subject matter
       or
       whether it is published as a printed book.  We recommend this
       License
       principally for works whose purpose is instruction or reference.


       1. APPLICABILITY AND DEFINITIONS

       This License applies to any manual or other work that contains a
       notice placed by the copyright holder saying it can be distributed
       under the terms of this License.  The "Document", below, refers to
       any
       such manual or work.  Any member of the public is a licensee, and
       is
       addressed as "you".

       A "Modified Version" of the Document means any work containing the
       Document or a portion of it, either copied verbatim, or with
       modifications and/or translated into another language.

       A "Secondary Section" is a named appendix or a front-matter section
       of
       the Document that deals exclusively with the relationship of the
       publishers or authors of the Document to the Document's overall
       subject
       (or to related matters) and contains nothing that could fall
       directly
       within that overall subject.  (For example, if the Document is in
       part a
       textbook of mathematics, a Secondary Section may not explain any
       mathematics.)  The relationship could be a matter of historical
       connection with the subject or with related matters, or of legal,
       commercial, philosophical, ethical or political position regarding
       them.

       The "Invariant Sections" are certain Secondary Sections whose
       titles
       are designated, as being those of Invariant Sections, in the notice
       that says that the Document is released under this License.

       The "Cover Texts" are certain short passages of text that are
       listed,
       as Front-Cover Texts or Back-Cover Texts, in the notice that says
       that
       the Document is released under this License.

       A "Transparent" copy of the Document means a machine-readable copy,
       represented in a format whose specification is available to the
       general public, whose contents can be viewed and edited directly
       and
       straightforwardly with generic text editors or (for images composed
       of
       pixels) generic paint programs or (for drawings) some widely
       available
       drawing editor, and that is suitable for input to text formatters
       or
       for automatic translation to a variety of formats suitable for
       input
       to text formatters.  A copy made in an otherwise Transparent file
       format whose markup has been designed to thwart or discourage
       subsequent modification by readers is not Transparent.  A copy that
       is
       not "Transparent" is called "Opaque".

       Examples of suitable formats for Transparent copies include plain
       ASCII without markup, Texinfo input format, LaTeX input format,
       SGML
       or XML using a publicly available DTD, and standard-conforming
       simple
       HTML designed for human modification.  Opaque formats include
       PostScript, PDF, proprietary formats that can be read and edited
       only
       by proprietary word processors, SGML or XML for which the DTD and/
       or
       processing tools are not generally available, and the
       machine-generated HTML produced by some word processors for output
       purposes only.

       The "Title Page" means, for a printed book, the title page itself,
       plus such following pages as are needed to hold, legibly, the
       material
       this License requires to appear in the title page.  For works in
       formats which do not have any title page as such, "Title Page"
       means
       the text near the most prominent appearance of the work's title,
       preceding the beginning of the body of the text.


       2. VERBATIM COPYING

       You may copy and distribute the Document in any medium, either
       commercially or noncommercially, provided that this License, the
       copyright notices, and the license notice saying this License
       applies
       to the Document are reproduced in all copies, and that you add no
       other
       conditions whatsoever to those of this License.  You may not use
       technical measures to obstruct or control the reading or further
       copying of the copies you make or distribute.  However, you may
       accept
       compensation in exchange for copies.  If you distribute a large
       enough
       number of copies you must also follow the conditions in section 3.

       You may also lend copies, under the same conditions stated above,
       and
       you may publicly display copies.


       3. COPYING IN QUANTITY

       If you publish printed copies of the Document numbering more than
       100,
       and the Document's license notice requires Cover Texts, you must
       enclose
       the copies in covers that carry, clearly and legibly, all these
       Cover
       Texts: Front-Cover Texts on the front cover, and Back-Cover Texts
       on
       the back cover.  Both covers must also clearly and legibly identify
       you as the publisher of these copies.  The front cover must present
       the full title with all words of the title equally prominent and
       visible.  You may add other material on the covers in addition.
       Copying with changes limited to the covers, as long as they
       preserve
       the title of the Document and satisfy these conditions, can be
       treated
       as verbatim copying in other respects.

       If the required texts for either cover are too voluminous to fit
       legibly, you should put the first ones listed (as many as fit
       reasonably) on the actual cover, and continue the rest onto
       adjacent
       pages.

       If you publish or distribute Opaque copies of the Document
       numbering
       more than 100, you must either include a machine-readable
       Transparent
       copy along with each Opaque copy, or state in or with each Opaque
       copy
       a publicly-accessible computer-network location containing a
       complete
       Transparent copy of the Document, free of added material, which the
       general network-using public has access to download anonymously at
       no
       charge using public-standard network protocols.  If you use the
       latter
       option, you must take reasonably prudent steps, when you begin
       distribution of Opaque copies in quantity, to ensure that this
       Transparent copy will remain thus accessible at the stated location
       until at least one year after the last time you distribute an
       Opaque
       copy (directly or through your agents or retailers) of that edition
       to
       the public.

       It is requested, but not required, that you contact the authors of
       the
       Document well before redistributing any large number of copies, to
       give
       them a chance to provide you with an updated version of the
       Document.


       4. MODIFICATIONS

       You may copy and distribute a Modified Version of the Document
       under
       the conditions of sections 2 and 3 above, provided that you release
       the Modified Version under precisely this License, with the
       Modified
       Version filling the role of the Document, thus licensing
       distribution
       and modification of the Modified Version to whoever possesses a
       copy
       of it.  In addition, you must do these things in the Modified
       Version:

       A. Use in the Title Page (and on the covers, if any) a title
       distinct
          from that of the Document, and from those of previous versions
          (which should, if there were any, be listed in the History
       section
          of the Document).  You may use the same title as a previous
       version
          if the original publisher of that version gives permission.
       B. List on the Title Page, as authors, one or more persons or
       entities
          responsible for authorship of the modifications in the Modified
          Version, together with at least five of the principal authors of
       the
          Document (all of its principal authors, if it has less than
       five).
       C. State on the Title page the name of the publisher of the
          Modified Version, as the publisher.
       D. Preserve all the copyright notices of the Document.
       E. Add an appropriate copyright notice for your modifications
          adjacent to the other copyright notices.
       F. Include, immediately after the copyright notices, a license
       notice
          giving the public permission to use the Modified Version under
       the
          terms of this License, in the form shown in the Addendum below.
       G. Preserve in that license notice the full lists of Invariant
       Sections
          and required Cover Texts given in the Document's license notice.
       H. Include an unaltered copy of this License.
       I. Preserve the section entitled "History", and its title, and add
       to
          it an item stating at least the title, year, new authors, and
          publisher of the Modified Version as given on the Title Page.
       If
          there is no section entitled "History" in the Document, create
       one
          stating the title, year, authors, and publisher of the Document
       as
          given on its Title Page, then add an item describing the
       Modified
          Version as stated in the previous sentence.
       J. Preserve the network location, if any, given in the Document for
          public access to a Transparent copy of the Document, and
       likewise
          the network locations given in the Document for previous
       versions
          it was based on.  These may be placed in the "History" section.
          You may omit a network location for a work that was published at
          least four years before the Document itself, or if the original
          publisher of the version it refers to gives permission.
       K. In any section entitled "Acknowledgements" or "Dedications",
          preserve the section's title, and preserve in the section all
       the
          substance and tone of each of the contributor acknowledgements
          and/or dedications given therein.
       L. Preserve all the Invariant Sections of the Document,
          unaltered in their text and in their titles.  Section numbers
          or the equivalent are not considered part of the section titles.
       M. Delete any section entitled "Endorsements".  Such a section
          may not be included in the Modified Version.
       N. Do not retitle any existing section as "Endorsements"
          or to conflict in title with any Invariant Section.

       If the Modified Version includes new front-matter sections or
       appendices that qualify as Secondary Sections and contain no
       material
       copied from the Document, you may at your option designate some or
       all
       of these sections as invariant.  To do this, add their titles to
       the
       list of Invariant Sections in the Modified Version's license
       notice.
       These titles must be distinct from any other section titles.

       You may add a section entitled "Endorsements", provided it contains
       nothing but endorsements of your Modified Version by various
       parties--for example, statements of peer review or that the text
       has
       been approved by an organization as the authoritative definition of
       a
       standard.

       You may add a passage of up to five words as a Front-Cover Text,
       and a
       passage of up to 25 words as a Back-Cover Text, to the end of the
       list
       of Cover Texts in the Modified Version.  Only one passage of
       Front-Cover Text and one of Back-Cover Text may be added by (or
       through arrangements made by) any one entity.  If the Document
       already
       includes a cover text for the same cover, previously added by you
       or
       by arrangement made by the same entity you are acting on behalf of,
       you may not add another; but you may replace the old one, on
       explicit
       permission from the previous publisher that added the old one.

       The author(s) and publisher(s) of the Document do not by this
       License
       give permission to use their names for publicity for or to assert
       or
       imply endorsement of any Modified Version.


       5. COMBINING DOCUMENTS

       You may combine the Document with other documents released under
       this
       License, under the terms defined in section 4 above for modified
       versions, provided that you include in the combination all of the
       Invariant Sections of all of the original documents, unmodified,
       and
       list them all as Invariant Sections of your combined work in its
       license notice.

       The combined work need only contain one copy of this License, and
       multiple identical Invariant Sections may be replaced with a single
       copy.  If there are multiple Invariant Sections with the same name
       but
       different contents, make the title of each such section unique by
       adding at the end of it, in parentheses, the name of the original
       author or publisher of that section if known, or else a unique
       number.
       Make the same adjustment to the section titles in the list of
       Invariant Sections in the license notice of the combined work.

       In the combination, you must combine any sections entitled
       "History"
       in the various original documents, forming one section entitled
       "History"; likewise combine any sections entitled
       "Acknowledgements",
       and any sections entitled "Dedications".  You must delete all
       sections
       entitled "Endorsements."


       6. COLLECTIONS OF DOCUMENTS

       You may make a collection consisting of the Document and other
       documents
       released under this License, and replace the individual copies of
       this
       License in the various documents with a single copy that is
       included in
       the collection, provided that you follow the rules of this License
       for
       verbatim copying of each of the documents in all other respects.

       You may extract a single document from such a collection, and
       distribute
       it individually under this License, provided you insert a copy of
       this
       License into the extracted document, and follow this License in all
       other respects regarding verbatim copying of that document.


       7. AGGREGATION WITH INDEPENDENT WORKS

       A compilation of the Document or its derivatives with other
       separate
       and independent documents or works, in or on a volume of a storage
       or
       distribution medium, does not as a whole count as a Modified
       Version
       of the Document, provided no compilation copyright is claimed for
       the
       compilation.  Such a compilation is called an "aggregate", and this
       License does not apply to the other self-contained works thus
       compiled
       with the Document, on account of their being thus compiled, if they
       are not themselves derivative works of the Document.

       If the Cover Text requirement of section 3 is applicable to these
       copies of the Document, then if the Document is less than one
       quarter
       of the entire aggregate, the Document's Cover Texts may be placed
       on
       covers that surround only the Document within the aggregate.
       Otherwise they must appear on covers around the whole aggregate.


       8. TRANSLATION

       Translation is considered a kind of modification, so you may
       distribute translations of the Document under the terms of section
       4.
       Replacing Invariant Sections with translations requires special
       permission from their copyright holders, but you may include
       translations of some or all Invariant Sections in addition to the
       original versions of these Invariant Sections.  You may include a
       translation of this License provided that you also include the
       original English version of this License.  In case of a
       disagreement
       between the translation and the original English version of this
       License, the original English version will prevail.


       9. TERMINATION

       You may not copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute the Document
       except
       as expressly provided for under this License.  Any other attempt to
       copy, modify, sublicense or distribute the Document is void, and
       will
       automatically terminate your rights under this License.  However,
       parties who have received copies, or rights, from you under this
       License will not have their licenses terminated so long as such
       parties remain in full compliance.


       10. FUTURE REVISIONS OF THIS LICENSE

       The Free Software Foundation may publish new, revised versions
       of the GNU Free Documentation License from time to time.  Such new
       versions will be similar in spirit to the present version, but may
       differ in detail to address new problems or concerns.  See
       http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/.

       Each version of the License is given a distinguishing version
       number.
       If the Document specifies that a particular numbered version of
       this
       License "or any later version" applies to it, you have the option
       of
       following the terms and conditions either of that specified version
       or
       of any later version that has been published (not as a draft) by
       the
       Free Software Foundation.  If the Document does not specify a
       version
       number of this License, you may choose any version ever published
       (not
       as a draft) by the Free Software Foundation.


       ADDENDUM: How to use this License for your documents

       To use this License in a document you have written, include a copy
       of
       the License in the document and put the following copyright and
       license notices just after the title page:

             Copyright (c)  YEAR  YOUR NAME.
             Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this
       document
             under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License,
       Version 1.1
             or any later version published by the Free Software
       Foundation;
             with the Invariant Sections being LIST THEIR TITLES, with the
             Front-Cover Texts being LIST, and with the Back-Cover Texts
       being LIST.
             A copy of the license is included in the section entitled
       "GNU
             Free Documentation License".

       If you have no Invariant Sections, write "with no Invariant
       Sections"
       instead of saying which ones are invariant.  If you have no
       Front-Cover Texts, write "no Front-Cover Texts" instead of
       "Front-Cover Texts being LIST"; likewise for Back-Cover Texts.

       If your document contains nontrivial examples of program code, we
       recommend releasing these examples in parallel under your choice of
       free software license, such as the GNU General Public License,
       to permit their use in free software.


